=== Zangband Combat ===
 
Attacking is simple in Zangband. If you move into a creature, you
attack him. You can attack from a distance by firing a missile or by
magical means such as aiming a wand. Creatures attack in the same way.
If they move into you, they attack you. Some creatures can also cast
spells from a distance, and others can use various breath weapons such
as fire on you from a distance.

Creatures in walls can not be attacked by wands and other magic attacks
normally stopped by walls. You can attack a creature in a wall normally
by trying to move into the wall space containing the creature. However,
if the creature is invisible (such as a ghost), you must tunnel into
the wall containing the creature. If you just try to move into the
wall, you will bump your head and look quite silly.

If you are wielding a weapon, the damage for the weapon is used when
you hit a creature. Otherwise you get a single punch which does minimal
damage.

You may wield both a primary weapon for melee combat, and a bow or
other missile launcher for launching missiles at the same time (along
with a light, an amulet, two rings, a helmet, boots, gloves, a shield,
a cloak, and body armor). Be sure not to try and kill a dragon with a
shovel, it makes you look silly and probably won't work...
 
Firing a missile while wielding the appropriate launcher is the only
way to get the "full" power out of the missile. You may of course throw
an arrow at a monster without shooting it, but you will find the
effects may not be what you had hoped.

Hits and misses are determined by ability to hit versus armor class. A
hit is a strike that does some damage; a miss may in fact reach a
target, but fails to do any  damage. Higher armor classes make it
harder to do damage, and so lead to more misses; they also reduce the
damage from a strike that actually occurs.
 

***** <A>
=== Monster Memories ===

There are hundreds of different creatures in Zangband, many of which
have the same letter symbol and color on the screen. The exact species
of a creature can be discovered by looking at it. It is also very
difficult to keep track of the capabilities of various creatures.
Luckily, Zangband automatically keeps track of your experiences with a
particular creature.
 
This feature is called the monster memory. You monster memory recalls
the particular attacks of each creature (whether or not technically a
monster) which you have suffered, as well as recalling if you have
observed them to multiply or move erratically, or drop treasure, etc.
Otherwise you would simply have to take notes, which is an unnecessary
bother.

If you have killed enough of a particular creature, or suffered enough
attacks, recalling the monster memory may also provide you with
information not otherwise available, such as a armor class or hit dice.
These are not explained, but may be useful to give the relative danger
of each creature. This memory can be passed on to a new character even
after you die by means of a reduced save file.
 

***** <B>
=== Your Weapon ===

Carrying a weapon in your backpack does you no good. You must wield a
weapon before it can be used in a fight. A secondary weapon can be kept
by keeping it in the backpack, and switching it with the primary weapon
when needed.

Weapons have two main magical characteristics, their enchanted ability
to hit and their enchanted ability to do damage, expressed as
`(+#,+#)'. A normal weapon would be `(+0,+0)'. Many weapons in Zangband
have bonuses to hit and/or do damage. Some weapons are cursed, and have
penalties that hurt the player. Cursed weapons cannot be unwielded
until the curse is lifted. Identifying a weapon will inform you of the
magical bonuses and penalties and whether or not it is cursed.

Zangband assumes that your youth in the rough environment near the
dungeons has taught you the relative merits of different weapons, and
displays as part of their description the damage dice which define
their capabilities. Any damage enchantment is added to the dice roll
for that weapon. The dice used for a given weapon is displayed as
"#d#". The first number indicates how many dice to roll, and the second
indicates how many sides they have. A "2d6" weapon will give damage
from 2 to 12, plus any damage bonus. The weight of a weapon is also a
consideration. Heavy weapons may hit harder, but they are also harder
to use. Depending on your strength, dexterity, character class, and
weapon weight, you may get several attacks per turn.

Missile booster weapons, such as bows, have their characteristics added
to those of the missile used, if the proper weapon/missile combination
is used, and the launcher multiplier is applied to the total damage,
making missile weapons very powerful given the proper missiles,
especially if they are enchanted.

Although you receive any magical bonuses an unidentified weapon may
possess when you wield it, those bonuses will not be added in to the
displayed values of to-hit and to-dam on your character sheet. You must
identify the weapon before the displayed values reflect the real values
used.


***** <C>
=== Ego Weapons ===

In addition to the ordinary weapons your character may find in the
dungeon, some of them may be endowed with additional powers. These
weapons fall into two types: (1) artifacts - which are dealt with
separately and can be identified by their name; and (2) Ego Weapons
which are addressed below. Unlike artifacts which are unique and may
only be found once in each game, it is not unusual to find several Ego
Weapons of the same type during the course of a character's adventures.

Note: Zangband has extended the original Angband's concept of adding
random abilities to the various Ego types considerably. These can be
either guaranteed or have only a varying chance of being granted. (See
'Randabil.spo' for details of the the random powers of Ego Weapons).
 

(Defender)
    A magical weapon that actually helps the wielder defend himself,
    by increasing his/her armour class, and providing resistance
    against damage from fire, cold, acid and lightning attacks. It also
    grants levitation, increases your stealth, let you see invisible
    creatures and protects from paralyzation and some slowing attacks.
    It also helps you regenerate hit-points and mana faster.

(Holy Avenger)
    A Holy Avenger is one of the more powerful of weapons. It will
    increase your wisdom and your armour class and prevent you from
    becoming afraid. This weapon will do extra damage when used against
    evil, demonic and undead creatures, and will also give you the
    ability to see invisible creatures. These weapons are also blessed
    and so can be wielded by priests with no penalty.

Weapon of Westernesse
    A Weapon of Westernesse is one of the more powerful weapons. It
    slays orcs, trolls and giants while increasing your strength,
    dexterity, and constitution. It also allows you to see invisible
    creatures and protects from paralyzation and some slowing attacks.

(Trump Weapon)
    A Trump Weapon is especially deadly against evil creatures and will
    increase your ability to discover hidden dungeon features. It will
    help you regenerate hit-points and mana faster and at the same time
    wll reduce your rate of food consumption. It provides resistance
    to nexus and protects from paralyzation and some slowing attacks.
    In addition it may cause you to teleport randomly and can be
    activated for teleport once every 50+1d50 turns.

(Pattern Weapon)
    A Pattern Weapon has been embedded with a fragment of the Pattern.
    It will increase your strength and constitution and also has a
    chance of increasing your dexterity. It is especially effective
    when used against evil, undead and demonic creatures. It will allow
    you to see invisible creatures and protects from paralyzation and
    some slowing attacks.

(Blessed Blade)
    A blessed blade will increase your wisdom and can be wielded by
    priests with no penalty.

Weapon of Extra Attacks
    Thses weapons will grant the user additional attacks per round.

Weapon of Sharpness (edged weapon only)
    These are known to occasionally score vorpal hits (see below) and
    will also increase your ability to tunnel through the dungeon
    walls.

Weapon of Earthquakes (hafted weapon only)
    These weapons may cause an earthquake when they strike an opponent
    which potentially may cause other monsters in the area to take
    damage from falling rocks and wil destry a small portion of the
    surrounding dungeon. They also increase your ability to tunnel
    through the dungeon walls.

Weapon of Slaying
    These weapons have a chance of being granted unusually high damage
    dice.

Implement of Digging
    These digging implements increase your ability to tunnel through
    the dungeon walls, and have the acid brand (see below).

--- The Elemental and Other Brands ---

(Chaotic)
    These bizarre, feared weapons have been manufactured in the Courts
    of Chaos, and are very unpredictable in combat often producing
    chaotic effects when they strike your opponent. Effects include
    *destruction*, teleport away and vampiric drain amoung others. A
    Chaotic weapon grants resistance to chaos attacks and cannot be
    damaged by acid, fire and electricity.

(Vampiric)
    These foul weapons have been created by Death magic. They lust for
    blood, and if such a weapon scores a hit, it greedily sucks life
    from the hapless victim, transferring the life energy to its
    master and healing them in the process.

Weapon of Melting
    A magical weapon of acid that will inflict three times the normal
    damage when used against a creature that is not resistant to acid.
    It also provides resistance against acid attacks.

Weapon of Shocking
    A magical weapon of lightning that will inflict three times the
    normal damage when used against a creature that is not resistant to
    electricity. It also provides resistance against lightning attacks.

Weapon of Freezing
    A magical weapon of ice that will inflict three times the normal
    damage when used against a creature that is not resistant to cold.
    It also provides resistance against cold attacks.

Weapon of Burning
    A magical weapon of fire that will inflict three times the normal
    damage when used against a creature that is not resistant to fire.
    It also provides resistance against fire attacks.

Weapon of Poisoning
    A magical weapon, coated with poison, that will inflict three times
    the normal damage to creatures not resistant to poison. It also
    provides resistance against toxic and poisonous attacks.

--- Weapons of Slay {Monster-Type} ---

Weapon of Slay Animal
    This weapon is especially effective against natural creatures and
    will do three times the normal damage against such creatures.

Weapon of Slay Evil
    This weapon is especially effective against evil creatures and will
    do two times the normal damage against such creatures.

Weapon of Slay Undead
    This weapon is especially effective against undead creatures and
    will do three times the normal damage against such creatures. It 
    will also provide resistance to life draining attacks.

Weapon of Slay Demon
    This weapon is especially effective against demonic creatures and
    will do three times the normal damage against such creatures.

Weapon of Slay Orc
    This weapon is especially effective against orcs and will do
    three times the normal damage against such creatures.

Weapon of Slay Troll
    This weapon is especially effective against trolls and will do
    three times the normal damage against such creatures.

Weapon of Slay Giant
    This weapon is especially effective against giant humanoids and
    will do three times the normal damage against such creatures.

Weapon of Slay Dragon
    This weapon is especially effective against dragons and will do
    three times the normal damage against such creatures.

--- Weapons of *Slay* {Monster-Type} ---

Weapon of *Slay* Animal
    This weapon is especially effective against natural creatures and
    will do three times the normal damage against such creatures. It
    will also increase your intelligence and allow you to regenerate
    hit-points and mana faster.

Weapon of *Slay* Evil
    This weapon is especially effective against evil creatures and will
    do two times the normal damage against such creatures. It will
    increase your wisdom and will also be a blessed blade.

Weapon of *Slay* Undead
    This weapon is especially effective against undead creatures and
    will do three times the normal damage against such creatures. It 
    will increase your wisdom and will also provide resistance to both
    nether and life-draining attacks. Finally, it will allow you to see
    invisible creatures.

Weapon of *Slay* Demon
    This weapon is especially effective against demonic creatures and
    will do three times the normal damage against such creatures. It
    will also increase your intelligence.

Weapon of *Slay* Orc
    This weapon is especially effective against orcs and will do three
    times the normal damage against such creatures. It will also
    increase your dexterity.

Weapon of *Slay* Troll
    This weapon is especially effective against trolls and will do
    three times the normal damage against such creatures. It will also
    increase your strength.

Weapon of *Slay* Giant
    This weapon is especially effective against giant humanoids and
    will do three times the normal damage against such creatures. It
    will also increase your strength.

Weapon of *Slay* Dragon
    This weapon is especially effective against dragons and will do
    five times the normal damage against such creatures. It will also
    increase your constitution.

--- Missile Launchers ---

Launcher of Accuracy
    These missile launchers have an unusually high bonus to hit.

Launcher of Velocity
    These missile launchers have an unusually high bonus to dam.

Launcher of Extra Might
    These missile launchers have an unusually high damage multiplier.

Launcher of Extra Shots
    These missile launchers grant additional shots per round.

--- Ammunition ---

Ammunition of Hurt Animal
    This ammunition is especialy effective against natural creatures
    and will do three times the normal damage against such creatures.

Ammunition of Hurt Evil
    This ammunition is especialy effective against evil creatures and
    will do two times the normal damage against such creatures.

Ammunition of Hurt Dragon
    This ammunition is especialy effective against dragons and will do
    three times the normal damage against such creatures.

Ammunition of Shocking
    This ammunition will inflict three times the normal damage when
    used against a creature that is not resistant to electricity.

Ammunition of Flame
    This ammunition will inflict three times the normal damage when
    used against a creature that is not resistant to fire.

Ammunition of Frost
    This ammunition will inflict three times the normal damage when
    used against a creature that is not resistant to cold.

Ammunition of Slaying
    This ammunition will have unusually large damage dice.

Ammunition of Wounding
    This ammunition will have unusually bonuses +to-hit and +to-dam.

--- Other Items ---

Apart from these there are some very rare and well made blades in
the dungeon. These include Blades of Chaos (which grant resistance
to chaos), Maces of Disruption (which are especially effective
against undead creatures) and Scythes of Slicing (which may score
vorpal hits). 

Note on Vorpal Weapons: A weapon with the vorpal flag will
have a 1-in-6 chance of doing additional damage each time it
strikes. If it passes the roll it has a chance of doing it again.
This continues until a roll is failed. The calculations are nasty
but the net effect is a 22% increase in damage (from the base
damage of the weapon only and not on the slays, +to-dam, etc.)


***** <D>
=== Body and Shield Bashes ===

Weight is the primary factor in being able to bash something, but
strength plays a role too. After bashing, a character may be off
balance for several rounds depending upon his dexterity.

Doors can be broken down by bashing them. Once a door is bashed open,
it is forever useless and cannot be closed.

Finally, a creature may be bashed. If a shield is currently being worn,
the bash is a shield bash and will do more damage. In either case, a
bash may throw an opponent off balance for a number of rounds, allowing
a player to get in a free hit or more. If the player is thrown off
balance, his opponent may get free hits on him. This is a risky attack.
It is also a hack.  :-)


***** <E>
=== Your Armor Class ===

Your armor class (or AC) is a number that describes the amount and the
quality of armor being worn. Armor class will generally run from about
0 to 150, but could become negative or greater than 150 with rarer
armor or by magical means.
 
The larger your armor class, the more protective it is. A negative
armor class would actually help get you hit. Armor protects you in
three manners. One, it makes you harder to be hit for damage. A hit for
no damage is the same as a miss. Two, good armor will absorb some of
the damage that your character would have taken from normal attacks.
Three, acid damage is reduced by wearing body armor (but the armor will
be damaged instead). It is obvious that a high armor class is a must
for surviving the deeper levels of Zangband.

Each piece of armor has a base armor value, which, like the damage from
weapons, is assumed known by the player, and a magic bonus, which will
not be displayed unless the armor has been identified or was bought in
a store.

Armor class values are always displayed between a set of brackets
as '[#]' or '[#,+#]'. The first value is the armor class of the
item.  The second number is the magical bonus of the item which is
only displayed if known, and will always have a sign preceding the
value.

Note: A few rings, amulets, and weapons also have the '[+#]'
notation, indicating that they provide an armor bonus. Many
pieces of heavy body armor will also have a '(-#)' before the
'[#,+#]', which indicates that the weight of the armor decreases
your chances of hitting monsters. This can range from nonexistent
for very light armor to (-8) for the very heaviest armor!


***** <F>
=== Ego Armor ===

In addition to the ordinary armor items your character may find in
the dungeon, some of them may be endowed with additional powers.
These armors are fall into two types: (1) artifacts - which are
dealt with separately and can be identified by their name; and (2)
Ego Armors which are addressed below. Unlike artifacts which are
unique and may only be found once in each game, it is not unusual
to find several Ego Armors of the same type during the course of
a character's adventures. Each Ego type may only be found on
certain types of armor - for example, you can find a Shield of
Elvenkind but not Boots of Elvenkind.

Note: Zangband has extended the original Angband's concept of adding
random abilities to the various Ego types considerably. These can be
either guaranteed or have only a varying chance of being granted. (See
'Randabil.spo' for details of the the random powers of Ego Armor).

--- Armor/Shields ---

of Resist Acid.
     A character using such an object will take only one third normal
     damage from any acid thrown upon him.  In addition, armor so
     enchanted will resist the acid's effects and not be damaged by it.

of Resist Lightning.
     A character using a resist lightning object will take only one
     third damage from electrical attacks.

of Resist Fire.
     A character using a resist fire object will take only one third
     damage from heat and fire.

of Resist Cold.
     A character using a resist cold object will take only one third
     damage from frost and cold.

of Resistance.
     A character wearing armor with this ability will have resistance
     to Acid, Cold, Fire, and Lightning as explained in each part
     above.

of Elvenkind.
     This is the same as Resistance armour, only generally better
     enchanted. It will also make you more stealthy.

of Permanence (Robes Only)
     These robes provide resistance to fire, cold, acid, and
     electricity and cannot be damaged by acid. They also resist life
     draining attacks and sustain all your primary stats. 

of Reflection (Shields Only)
     These shields reflect missiles and bolt spells preventing damage
     to the player character and often damaging the originating
     monster. The reflection is not 100% effective but nearly so. 

--- Caps/Helms/Crowns ---

of Intelligence
     This item will both increase and sustain your intelligence.

of Wisdom
     This item and will both increase and sustain your wisdom.

of Beauty
     This item will both increase and sustain your charisma.

of the Magi
     This item will both increase and sustain your intelligence, and
     grants resistance against fire, frost, acid, and lightning.

of Might
     This item will both increase and sustain your strength, dexterity,
     and constituion and will also make you immune to any foe's attempt
     to slow or paralyze you.

of Lordliness
     This item will both increase and sustain your wisdom and charisma.

of Seeing
     This item will grant the ability to see invisible creatures, and
     will also increase your ability to locate traps and secret doors.
     In addition it will also prevent you from being blinded.

of Infravision
     This item will increase the range of you infravision and grants
     infravision if you are a race which does not get it intrinsically.

of Light
     This item provides a permanent light source.

of Telepathy
     This item grants its wielder telepathy.

of Regeneration
     This item will help you regenerate hit points and mana more
     quickly than normal, allowing you to fight longer before needing
     to rest. You will use food faster than normal while wearing this
     crown because of the regenerative effects.

--- Cloaks ---

of Protection
     These cloaks cannot be harmed by acid, fire, cold or lightning
     attacks but do not grant resistance to these elements.

of Stealth
     These cloaks will make your character more stealthy.

of Aman
     These cloaks cannot be harmed by acid, fire, cold or lightning
     attacks but do not grant resistance to these elements. They also
     make your character more stealthy.

of Immolation
     These cloaks cannot be harmed by acid or fire attacks. They also
     grant resistance to fire and give out a fiery aura.

of Electricity
     These cloaks cannot be harmed by acid or electricity attacks. They
     also grant resistance to electricity and give out an electric
     aura.

--- Gloves/Gauntlets/Sets of Cesti ---

of Free Action
     This item will make you immune to any foe's attempt to slow or
     paralyze you. A mage-type spellcaster who wields them will not
     have their mana penalized.

of Slaying
     In addition to its armor bonus, this item will grant a bonus to
     your +to-hit and +to-dam.

of Agility
     This item will increase your dexterity. A mage-type spellcaster
     who wields them will not have their mana penalized.

of Power
     This item will increase your strength and will also grant a bonus
     to your +to-hit and +to-dam.

--- Boots ---

of Levitation
     These boots will grant you levitation.

of Stealth
     These boots will make your character more stealthy.

of Free Action
     This item will make you immune to any foe's attempt to slow or
     paralyze you.

of Speed
     These boots will make your character more speedy.

--- Special Items ---
     
Dragon Scale Mails.
     These extremely rare pieces of armour come in many different
     colors, each protecting you against the relevent dragons.
     Naturally they are all resistant to acid damage. They also
     occasionally allow you to breathe as a dragon would!

Dragon Shields and Helms
     These shields and helms have a chance of granting one or more 
     random resistances.

Other items
     Apart from these there are some very rare, and well made armours
     in the dungeon with not necessarily any special abilities. These
     include Adamantite Plate Mail, Mithril Plate Mail, Mithril Chain
     Mail, Shields of Deflection, and Shadow Cloaks. The first four
     cannot be damaged by acid because of the quality metals they
     contain. Shadow Cloaks grant resistance to both light and darkness
     attacks.


***** <G>
=== Artifacts ===

Of all the objects in Zangband that you might find, by far the most
important group are artifacts.  Artifacts are unique items with
additional properties such as increasing or sustaining one or more
of your stats and granting resistances or abilities. Often an
artifact cab be 'A'ctivated for a magical effect. These can be
Extremely useful - especialy for classes that are weak in magic.

There are two types of artifacts - fixed and random. The fixed
artifacts each have entries in the lib/edit/a_info.txt file
and consequently have a chance of appearing in each game you play.
On the other hand, random artifacts are created by the game and
have both random names and random properites. Once created, there
is only a vanishingly small chance you will ever see one exactly
the same again.


--- (Non-) Preserve Mode ---

One important thing to note when considering artifacts is your
initial choice of (non-)preserve mode. in non-preserve mode, once a
fixed artifact is generated (either on the dungeon floor or in a
monster drop), it will never be generated again during that game.
This means that if you miss the artifact by leaving the level before
you pick it up it is gone forever. On the other hand, in preserve mode
this behaviour is only exhibited once you have identified the artifact.
It is therefor safer to leave a level before it is comletely explored
as any fixed artifact can be regenerated in subsequent levels.


--- Special feelings ---

If you have stayed on the previous level long enough, on entering a
new level you will receive a 'feeling' which reflects the quality
of the monsters and objects on the level. Feelings are discussed in
more detail in the Town and Dungeon section. One possible feeling
is 'You have a special feeling about this level'. This message is
only given when playing in non-preserve mode and is an indicator
that you have either a monster pit, vault or artifact on the level.
Artifacts always cause special feelings but pits and vaults are
increasingly less likely to do so as you get deeper in the dungeon.
At very deep levels, special feelings are almost always artifacts.

Note: In non-preserve mode, you can still find artifacts on
levels that did not give a special feeling but these will always
be the result of a monster dropping them.


--- The '~' Command ---

By pressing '~' and choosing the option for artifacts, you can see
what fixed (but not random) artifacts you have found so far. In
non-preserve mode, this option will also show which fixed (but not
random) artifacts you have missed. However, in this case, it will
show nothing about fixed artifacts on the curent dungeon level but
not yet found and as a result is often best used on the town level.


--- Random Abilities of Fixed Artifacts ---

Some of the fixed artifacts are given random abilities such as
sustains, resistances or other powers.  (See 'randabil.spo' for details
of the random abilities of the fixed artifacts).


***** <H>
=== Monk Attacks ===

The Monk character is designed to be a barehanded fighter rather
than using a wepaon like the other Zangband classes. As a Monk's
level increases the number of attacks they get per round increases
and new, increasingly powerful attacks become available. Higher
level attacks have a chance to stun the Monk's opponent.

While the type of attack that a Monk uses for each blow is chosen
at random from the list of available attacks, at higher levels
there is a bias towards the attacks which do greater damage.  This
is  because at these levels, the game will roll several times for
each blow with the highest attack type chosen.


--- Monks Attack Types ---

Attack Name   Min.lvl   Damage   Stun    Notes
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Punch            1       1d4       -
Kick             2       1d6       -
Strike           3       1d7       -
Knee             5       2d3       *     Likely to stun male opponents
Elbow            7       1d8       -
Butt             9       2d5       -
Ankle Kick      11       3d4       -     May slow down the opponent
Uppercut        13       4d4       6
Double-kick     16       5d4       8
Cat's Claw      20       5d5       -
Jump Kick       25       5d6      10
Eagle's Claw    29       6d6       -
Circle Kick     33       6d8      10
Iron Fist       37       8d8      10
Flying Kick     41       8d10     12
Dragon Fist     45      10d10     16
Crushing Blow   48      10d12     18


***** <I>
=== Basic Tactics ===


Pillardancing
-------------
Requires that you be at least twice as fast as the monster you are
fighting. Find a single block of wall, freestanding, and lure your
enemy to it. When both you and your eneny are standing next to the
pillar, hit him, and then move so that you are opposite the pillar
from him. He will use his turn to move so that he's standing next
to you. Hit him again, and then move again. Repeat until he's dead.

Note: Some monsters move eratically, and cannot be relied upon
to move in the method expected. Also, some monsters (mostly
Ghosts) Can move through walls, and a small number of monsters
can chew through walls.


Shoot'n Scoot
-------------
Requires a large room, Phase Door, and some type of missile weapon.
Stand at one end of the room, your enemy at the other. Fire your
missile weapon at him until he gets close, and then Phase Door.
Fire again, until he gets close, and repeat. By the time you run
out of ammunition, he should be dead or weak enough for you to
finish him HTH (Hand to Hand).


Hack'n Back
-----------
Requires that you be at least twice as fast as your opponent. Stand
next to your enemy, hit him, and back up. He should use his turn to
move towards you instead of using a missile weapon or a spell. Hit
him again, back up again, repeat. This is a little more dangerous
than Pillardancing, because the monster gets a chance to breathe or
cast a spell, but it's easier to set up.


Wail'n Bail
-----------
Requires Teleport items. Fight the monster until you're almost
dead, teleport out, find him, and resume fighting. This is
dangerous, because you could teleport right next to some nasty that
will kill you. Also, it is not generally useful for killing unique
monsters, as they regenerate damage very quickly, and by the time
you find them again, they will have healed what you did to them.


The Anti-Summoning Corridor
---------------------------
Requires a little time to set up. This can be done just about
anywhere. Dig a twisting corridor into the rock, and station
yourself at one end of it. When your opponent arrives, he won't be
able to summon any monsters next to you. This is a very important
technique for fighting many higher-end monsters which very quickly
bring in a horde of other monsters.


--
Original   : (??)
Updated    : (??)
Updated    : Zangband DevTeam
Last update: December 3, 1999
