=== Defending and Armor ===
 
In Hengband, monsters may damage and otherwise harm you in a number of
ways: in direct melee combat, by exploding next to you, by breathing
on you and by casting spells. Some monsters referred to as "summoners"
may not directly harm you but may summon other monsters to do their
dirty work for them.

Creatures will attack you in the same manner in which you attack them.
If they move into you, they attack you. Virtually all monsters can
lower your hit points by means of a melee attack, and, if you lose too
many, you die. Fortunately, this is also the attack most easily guarded
against (by wearing armor). Each monster has a maximum of four melee
attacks which may be of varying type, power and effect.

In addition to pure damage, there can be a number of side effects from
a monster hitting you. For example, an especially powerful attack may
stun or wound you. Stunning is cumulative and, if not addressed, may
eventually result in you becoming knocked out which allows your
opponent to continue attacking while you lie helpless. Wounds will
cause you to lose hit points each round until you either die or your
wound heals. You will slowly recover from any wound except a Mortal
Wound with time and all wounds can be healed magically.

In addition to wouds and stunning, some monsters melee attacks may have
other consequences. These include causing you to become blind, scared,
confused, poisoned or paralyzed. There are many others less common
effects. More information about monsters' melee attacks may be found
in the section on Monsters (see monster.txt).

Many monsters also have an array of magical spells or breath attacks
which they may use against you from a distance. For example, a red
dragon might breathe fire at you. You can defend yourself from the
side effects of melee attacks, monster spells and breath attacks
by searching for armor that is resistant to that form of attack.

As you descend deeper into the dungeon in search of better items,
you will need to steadily improve your defenses against pure damage,
wounds, stunning, bolts, balls, breaths of various kinds, reductions
of exp and stats, theft and a variety of miscellaneous magical
attacks.

***** <Armor>
=== Armor Class ===

Your armor class (or AC) is a number that describes the amount and
quality of armor being worn. Armor class will generally run from about
0 to 150, but could become negative or greater than 150 with rarer
armor or by magical means. Note that spell casters receive a penalty
to their maximum mana for wearing armor that is too heavy. In addition,
monks lose much of their barehanded fighting skill if their armor
becomes too heavy.
 
The larger your armor class, the more protective it is. A negative
armor class would actually help get you hit. Armor protects you in
three ways. First, it makes you harder to hit for damage. A hit for
no damage is the same as a miss. Second, good armor will absorb some
of the damage that your character would have taken from normal attacks.
Third, acid damage is reduced by wearing body armor (but the armor
will be damaged instead). It is obvious that a high armor class is
a must for surviving the deeper levels of Hengband. Note, however,
that armor class by itself will not protect you from the side effects
of monster melee attacks mentioned above.

Each piece of armor has a base armor value, which, like the damage from
weapons, is assumed known by the player and a magic bonus, which will
not be displayed unless the armor has been identified or was bought in
a store.

Armor class values are always displayed between a set of brackets as
'[#]' or '[#,+#]'. The first value is the armor class of the item. The
second number is the magical bonus of the item which is only displayed
if known and will always have a sign preceding the value.

Note: a few rings, amulets and weapons also have the '[+#]' notation,
indicating that they provide an armor bonus. Many pieces of heavy body
armor will also have a '(-#)' before the '[#,+#]', which indicates that
the weight of the armor decreases your chances of hitting monsters.
This can range from nonexistent for very light armor to (-8) for the
very heaviest armor!


***** <ResistingMagic>
=== Resisting Magical Attacks ===

Against some magical attacks (such as cause wounds, cause blindness or
cause fear) the player will first get a saving throw (see the Skills
page). However, against attacks such as bolts and ball spells this does
not apply. Also, there is no saving throw against breath attacks. For
these types of attacks, your only recourse it to find items or other
means which grant you 'resistance' to that type of attack.

In Hengband there are many forms of resistance which may be obtained
either as bonuses from your equipment, as the result of casting a
magical spell, activating certain artifacts or as the result of a
mutation. Unfortunately, not all attacks available to monsters can be
resisted, and most can only be partially resisted.

Each resistance has one or more corresponding monster attacks which
it 'resists'. By this we mean that it reduces the amount of damage
that your character will take as a result of an attack of that kind.
For example, fire resistance will reduce the damage to your character
resulting from fire attacks such as a fire bolt or being breathed upon
by a red dragon. Note that appropriate resistances will also negate or
reduce some side effects of monster melee attacks.

There are two categories of resistances: (1) the low (or elemental)
resistances - acid, fire, cold and electricity; and (2) the high
resistances - poison, confusion, light, dark, blindness, sound, fear,
shards, nexus, chaos, nether, gravity, disenchantment and time. In
general, the low resistances are more commonly available, they can be
double-resisted and the corresponding attacks have a higher maximum
damage potential. 

A common misconception amongst new players is that having multiple
sources of a particular resistance will increase your character's
resistance to attacks of that form. This is not true. You will get the
same benefit from wielding a single Amulet of Resist Acid as wielding
a Shield of Resist Acid, body armor that grants acid resistance and
an artifact weapon which grants acid resistance all at the same time.

As stated above, however, it is possible to get double resistance for
the low resists (and also poison). This is because these resistances
are also available on a temporary basis by casting certain spells or
by quaffing a Potion of Resistance. Some items may also activate for
temporary resistance. The temporary effect is cumulative with the
permanent effect and will increase your protection against these
kinds of attacks. It also prevents damage to your belongings by the
doubly-resisted element.

(Warning 1) Double resistance prevents an item from being destroyed,
but it does not prevent equipment from being damaged by acid. It is
necessary to obtain acid immunity to prevent that form of damage.

(Warning 2) The magical spells in some realms can temporarily add
a resistance, like nether, which is not a resistance to one of the
basic four elements nor poison resistance. Currently, that kind of
temporary resistance does not combine with a permanent resistance
to become a double resistance.

***** <EgoArtifact>
=== Ego Armor and Artifacts ===

In addition to the ordinary armor items your character may find in
the dungeon, your character may find armor endowed with additional
powers. Those fall into two types:  (1) artifacts and (2) ego armor.
Unlike artifacts which are unique and may only be found once in each
game, it is not unusual to find several pieces of ego armor of the
same type during the course of a character's adventures.

In general, artifacts and ego armor may boost one or more of your
primary statistics, may confer certain abilities upon your character
and may grant resistance to certain forms of attack. Each Ego type
may only be found on certain types of armor - for example, you can
find a Shield of Elvenkind but not Boots of Elvenkind.

--- Shields ---
of Resist Acid
     A character using a shield of this type will take only one third
     the normal damage from acid. The shield can be activated every
     20+d20 turns to gain temporary resistance to acid. In addition,
     the shield is not damaged by acid.

of Resist Lightning
     A character using a shield of this type will take only one third
     the normal damage from electricity. The shield can be activated
     every 20+d20 turns to gain temporary resistance to electricity.

of Resist Fire
     A character using a shield of this type will take only one third
     the normal damage from fire. The shield can be activated every
     20+d20 turns to gain temporary resistance to fire.

of Resist Cold
     A character using a shield of this type will take only one third
     the normal damage from cold. The shield can be activated every
     20+d20 turns to gain temporary resistance to cold.

of Resistance
     A character using a shield of this type gains resistance to acid,
     cold, fire and electricity. It may also have another, random,
     resistance or resistance to poison.

of Reflection
     A shield of this type can cause bolt spells to bounce off,
     preventing damage from the spell and often damaging the caster.
     The bounce effect happens most, but not all, of the time.

of Night and Day
     A shield of this type protects against damage from light and
     darkness attacks and prevents the blinding effect of those
     attacks.

of Protection
     A shield of this type is not affected by acid, fire, cold
     or electricity, but it does not provide resistance to them.
     It usually provides a larger than normal bonus to AC.

of the Dwarves
     A shield of this type has a larger bonus to AC than a normal
     shield, increases the consitution of the wielder and provides
     a random resistance to one of the four basic elements.
     Furthermore, it is lighter than a normal shield.

--- Armor ---

of Resistance
     Armor of this type provides resistance to acid, cold, fire
     and electricity. It also provides another, random, resistance
     and may provide resistance to poison.

of Elvenkind
     Armor of this type provides resistance to acid, cold, fire
     and electricity. It enhances the stealth of the wearer and
     provides another, random, resistance.

of Uruk-hai
     Armor of this type gives attack bonuses for to-hit and
     to-damage. It also provides resistance to acid, cold, fire,
     electricity and one other, random, resistance.

of the Dwarves
     Armor of this type has a larger bonus to AC than normal
     armor, increases the constitution of the wearer and provides
     a random resistance to one of the four basic elements.
     Furthermore, it is lighter than normal armor.

of Olog-hai
     Armor of this type gives attack bonuses for to-hit and
     to-damage. It also increases the strength of the wearer and
     provides a random resistance to one of the four basic elements.

of Druid
     Armor of this type increases the wisdom of the wearer. It also
     provides a random resistance to one of the four basic elements
     and another, random, resistance.

Robe of Permanence
     A robe of this type provides resistance to fire, cold, acid
     and electricity. It sustains all the primary statistics of the
     wearer and provides resistance to experience draining attacks.
     It also provides one additional, random, resistance.

Robe of The Twilight
     A robe of this type has a very wide range of abilities. It
     provides resistance to the four basic elements and almost all
     of the higher resistances. It sustains all the primary statistics
     of the wearer and provides resistance to experience draining
     attacks. It also can protect against paralyzation and reflect
     bolt spells. The wearer can levitate and see invisible creatures.
     However, the price is that the wearer's armor class is set to
     zero.

of Morgul
     Armor of this type provides resistance to cold, poison and
     nether and may provide an additional, random, resistance.
     Furthermore, it surrounds the wearer with a sheath of cold
     air which can damage those that attack the wearer. It also
     allows the wearer to always sense the presence of nearby
     undead. However, this armor will drain experience from time
     to time, spreads curses to equipped items, and has a random,
     unpleasant, effect.

of Demon
     Armor of this type increases the strength, intelligence and
     consitition of the wearer.  If provides resistance to fire and
     nether and may provide an additional, random resistance.  It
     allows the wearer to always sense the presence of nearby
     demons and envelops the wearer in a fiery aura.  However, it
     has a random, unpleasant, effect.

--- Caps/Helms/Crowns ---

of Brilliance
     This item will increase and sustain your intelligence, wisdom,
     and charisma.

of the Magi
     This item will increase and sustain your intelligence. It grants
     resistance to fire, cold, acid and electricity. It also has
     an additional, random, ability and provides another, random,
     resistance.

of Might
     This item will increase and sustain your strength, dexterity,
     and constitution. It will protect you from paralyzation and
     some slowing attacks. It provides one, random, resistance.

of Lordliness
     This item will increase and sustain your wisdom and charisma.
     It provides one, random, resistance.

of Seeing
     This item will grant the ability to see invisible creatures and
     will also increase your ability to locate traps and secret doors.
     In addition, it will prevent you from being blinded. Some items
     of this type confer telepathic abilities.

of Infravision
     This item will increase the range of your infravision and grants
     infravision if you are a race which does not get it intrinsically.

of Light
     This item provides a permanent light source. It also provides
     resistance against light attacks.

of Darkness
     This item provides resistance to darkness but also decreases the
     radius or your light source.

of Telepathy
     This item grants its wielder telepathy.

of Regeneration
     This item will help you regenerate hit points and mana more
     quickly than normal, allowing you to fight longer before needing
     to rest. You will use food faster than normal while wearing this
     headgear because of the regenerative effects.

of Basilisk
     This item will increase the range of your infravision. It also
     provides resistance to poison and protects you from paralyzation
     and some slowing attacks.

of Demon
     This item will increase your intelligence. It also provides
     resistance to fire and nether and may provide an additional,
     random resistance. It allows you to always sense the presence
     of nearby demons and surrounds you with an aura of fire.
     However, it has a random, unpleasant, effect.

--- Cloaks ---

of Protection
     These cloaks cannot be harmed by acid, fire, cold or lightning
     attacks but do not grant resistance to those elements. They
     usually have a larger than normal bonus to AC.

of Stealth
     These cloaks will make your character more stealthy.

of Aman
     These cloaks cannot be harmed by acid, fire, cold or lightning
     attacks but do not grant resistance to these elements. They also
     make your character more stealthy and provide one random
     resistance.

of Immolation
     These cloaks cannot be harmed by acid or fire attacks. They also
     grant resistance to fire and give out a fiery aura.

of Electricity
     These cloaks cannot be harmed by acid or electricity attacks. They
     also grant resistance to electricity and give out an electric
     aura.

of the Bat
     These very powerful cloaks grant speed, stealth, infravision,
     levitation, the ability to see invisible and resistance to
     darkness. However, in return for those abilities, you will have
     large penalties to to-hit and to-damage.

--- Gloves/Gauntlets/Sets of Cesti ---

of Free Action
     This item will protect you from paralyzation and some slowing
     attacks.  A mage-type spellcaster who wears them will not have
     his or her mana penalized.

of Slaying
     In addition to its armor bonus, this item will grant a bonus to
     your to-hit and to-damage.

of Agility
     This item will increase your dexterity. A mage-type spellcaster
     who wears them will not have his or her mana penalized.

of Power
     This item will increase your strength and will also grant a bonus
     to your to-hit and to-damage. It also provides one random
     resistance.

of Genji
     This item will increase your dexterity and grant a bonus to
     your to-hit. It can decrease the penalty for wielding two weapons
     at once, one in each hand.

of Magic Mastery
     This item will increase your ability to use magical devices.
     A mage-type spellcaster who wears them will not have his or
     her mana penalized.

--- Boots ---

of Levitation
     These boots will grant you levitation. Some provide one
     random resistance.

of Stealth
     These boots will make your character more stealthy.

of Free Action
     These boots will protect you from paralyzation and some slowing
     attacks.

of Jumping
     These boots can be activated to instantly teleport you a short
     distance.

of Speed
     These boots will make your character more speedy.

--- Special Items ---
     
Dragon Scale Mails.
     These extremely rare pieces of armor come in many different
     colors, each protecting you against the dragons of that color.
     They can not be damaged by acid, fire, cold or electricity.
     They also occasionally allow you to breathe as a dragon would!

Dragon Shields, Helms, Boots and Gloves
     These items have a chance of granting one or more random
     resistances. They all can not be damaged by acid, fire, cold
     or electricity.

--- Other items ---


Apart from these there are some very rare, and well made, pieces of
armor in the dungeon. Adamantite Plate Mail, Mithril Plate Mail,
and Mithril Chain Mail are not damaged by acid because of the quality
metals they contain. Mirror Shields have the ability to reflect bolt
spells. Elven Cloaks make the wearer more stealthy and make it easier
to find traps or secret doors. Shadow Cloaks provide resistance to
light and darkness attacks. All of those could also be ego items or
artifacts.

There are also legendary pieces of armor (artifacts) which are similar
to ego items but usually have more abilities and are very powerful.
Artifacts never break. However, they may deteriorate and, if caught
in the effect range of *destruction, may disappear forever.

In Hengband, there are two types of artifacts: fixed and random.
A fixed artifact has a predetermined name and attributes, so,
if you play the game many times, you may encounter the same fixed
artifact. The name and attributes of a random artifact are determined
when it is generated, so it is extremely unlikely that you would see
that artifact again in another game.



***** <Resistances>
=== The Resistances ===

This section describes the various types of attack available to monsters
and how they may be resisted.

Acid
    Acid resistance will cut damage from acid attacks by two-thirds.
    Temporary resistance will also reduce damage by two-thirds.
    This means that a character with both permanent and temporary
    resistance will only take one-ninth of the original damage. Double
    resistance prevents the destruction of acid-sensitive belongings.

Fire
    Fire resistance will cut damage from fire attacks by two-thirds.
    Temporary resistance will also reduce damage by two-thirds.
    This means that a character with both permanent and temporary
    resistance will only take one-ninth of the original damage. Fire
    resistance helps protect belongings from fire damage; double
    resistance prevents the destruction of fire-sensitive belongings.

Cold
    Cold resistance will cut damage from cold attacks by two-thirds.
    Temporary resistance will also reduce damage by two-thirds.
    This means that a character with both permanent and temporary
    resistance will only take one-ninth of the original damage. Cold
    resistance helps protect belongings from cold damage; double
    resistance prevents the destruction of cold-sensitive belongings.

Electricity
    Electricity resistance will cut damage from electric attacks by
    two-thirds. Temporary resistance will also reduce damage by
    two-thirds. This means that a character with both permanent
    and temporary resistance will only take one-ninth of the original
    damage. Electricity resistance helps protect belongings from
    damage due to electricity; double resistance prevents the
    destruction of electricity-sensitive belongings.

Poison
    Poison resistance will cut damage from poison attacks by
    two-thirds. Temporary resistance will also reduce damage by
    two-thirds. This means that a character with both permanent
    and temporary resistance will only take one-ninth of the original
    damage. Poison resistance will also protect you from becoming
    'poisoned' but characters will not be healed of their 'poisoned'
    status if they become resistant to poison after already being
    poisoned. This must be cured by other means.

Confusion
    Confusion resistance will reduce the damage taken from confusion
    attacks and breaths. It will also prevent your character from
    becoming 'Confused' (if you are confused you will be unable to
    read scrolls, cast spells or prayers and will have a dramatically
    reduced ability to use magical devices). In particular, water
    attacks may confuse as a side effect. That can be prevented if
    you have confusion resistance.

Light
    Light attacks damage the player and cause blindness as a side
    effect. Light resistance reduces the damage and also prevents
    blindness caused from light attacks (but not from other attacks).

Darkness
    Darkness attacks damage the player and cause blindness as a
    side effect.  Darkness resistance reduces the damage and also
    prevents blindness caused from darkness attacks (but not from other
    attacks). In addition, some high-level monsters can cast Darkness
    Storms. Those are a particularly dangerous form of attack but are
    resisted if you have darkness resistance.

Blindness
    Resist blindness will protect you from spells which blind and from
    being "hit to blind" (a few monsters can do this) as well as from
    the blindness (but not the damage) caused by light and darkness
    attacks.

Sound
    Sound resistance reduces damage from sound attacks and also the
    stunning side effects of sound and some other attacks. (Sound,
    plasma, water, force, gravity and shards attacks may all stun the
    player as may ice bolt attacks). Sound resistance does not protect
    against stunning from melee attacks.

Fear
    Fear resistance gives immunity to attacks which make your character
    'Afraid' (being afraid prevents your character from participating
    in melee combat but does not otherwise affect you).

Shards
    Shards resistance will reduce the damage taken from shards attacks
    (this includes a Cyberdemon's Rocket Launchers). It also prevents
    the cuts that come from these attacks (and also ice bolts). Some
    shards attacks may also stun the player, this is prevented if you
    have sound resistance and not by shard resistance.

Nexus
    Nexus attacks are one of the most annoying attacks in Hengband but
    will rarely kill you directly. A Nexus attack will damage the player
    and may teleport the player, teleport-level the player or swap two
    of your primary statistics around. Nexus resistance will reduce the
    damage taken from such attacks and prevent the side effects but
    will not prevent you from being teleported by non-nexus attacks
    (for that you will need an item granting anti-teleportation).

Chaos
    Chaos attacks are one of the most dangerous attack types in
    Hengband. They have a relatively high maximum damage and may also
    confuse the player, cause hallucinations, reduce your character's
    experience and cause you to mutate. Chaos resistance will the
    damage taken from such attacks and negate all side effects.

Nether
    Nether is another dangerous attack type. Nether attacks are common
    deeper in the dungeon, have a high maximum damage and will also
    cause your character's experience to be drained. Nether resistance
    will reduce the damage taken and the experience loss. It will not
    reduce the experience loss from non-nether attacks (for this you
    need hold-life).

Gravity
    Gravity attacks damage the player and also cause you (and monsters
    they hit) to be teleported a short distance. A side effect of this
    is that since the effect is calculated on each spot in turn, it is
    possible to be blinked into a spot which hasn't been calculated yet
    but is in line to be affected by the breath - the net result is to
    be hit twice, blinked twice and damaged twice by the same breath.
    Gravity attacks may also stun your character. Levitation provides
    resistance to the damaging effect of gravity, resist teleportation
    prevents the blinking around and resistance to sound prevents you
    from becoming stunned.

Disenchantment
    Disenchantment attacks damage the player and may result in the
    to-hit, to-dam, to-AC, pval bonuses on your wielded equipment
    being reduced. Disenchantment resistance will reduce the damage
    you take and will prevent the disenchantment of your equipment.

Toxic Waste
    Resist poison will resist the damage and side effects from Toxic
    Waste attacks. Otherwise, you will suffer fearful side effects
    include reducing stats and changing your race.


***** <Unresistable>
--- Unresistable Attacks ---

There is no resistance to the following types of attacks although some
of their side effects may be resisted.

Time
    Time attacks damage the player, drain experience and may reduce one
    or more of your primary statistics. Some kinds of magic or very
    rare items grant resistance to time attacks, but you usually won't
    have any resistance.

Plasma
    Plasma can damage you, stun you and burn your equipment. Fire
    immunity (not resistance) prevents burning of equipment, sound
    resistance prevents the stunning, but there is no resistance to
    the damage.

Inertia
    Inertia will damage you and slow you down by -10 speed. There is
    no resistance to the damage or the slowing.

Mana
    There is no resistance to this attack. It also destroys all items
    on the ground.

Disintegration
    There is no resistance this attack. It also destroys all non-permanent
    walls and any items on the ground.

***** <Immunities>
--- Immunities ---

It is also possible that you may find items which grant immunity
to one or (very occasionally) more of the low resistances, i.e. acid,
fire, cold and electricity.  In this case, when wielded, you will
take no damage from attacks of the relevant kind and, in addition,
your equipment and inventory are safe from being damaged or
destroyed by the attack.

In addition, free action, fear and blindness resistance may be
thought of as immunities since having they protect totally from the
respective form of attack.

(Warning) Even if you have free action, you may be paralyzed in
special circumstances. It can be caused by hunger, casting a spell
when you have insufficient mana or, more importantly, the blood
curse cast by an Amberite.

***** <Miscellaneous>
--- Miscellaneous ---

The following are not properly resistances but may be sensibly included
on this page.

Free Action
    Free action is immunity to paralysis: this is foolproof except in
    the special case of the Ancient and Foul Curse which requires a
    successful saving throw as well as free action to avoid should it
    attempt to paralyze you. Spells, potions of paralysis and being
    hit-to-paralyze are completely protected against.

Hold-life
    Hold Life is protection from experience draining. It is 90%
    foolproof: 10% of draining attacks will still drain you, but by
    less than would otherwise have been the case.


***** <Recovering>
=== Recovering from Attacks ===

You cannot combat with the creatures in Hengband and expect to come out
unscathed every time. When a monster inflicts damage on you, you will
need to take steps to recover from the damage as soon as possible.

--- Healing Items ---

Healing is available in multiple forms including, from weakest to
strongest: Potions and Staffs of Cure Light Wounds, Potions of Cure
Serious Wounds, Potions of Cure Critical Wounds, Potions of Curing,
Potions, Staffs and Rods of Healing, Potions of *Healing* and
Potions of Life. Both the Life and Nature realms contain spells to
heal the player.

Cure Light Wounds
     Restores 2d8 hitpoints and removes cuts, blindness and berserk.

Cure Serious Wounds
     Restores 4d8 hitpoints and removes cuts, blindness, confusion and
     berserk.

Cure Critical Wounds
     Restores 6d8 hitpoints and removes cuts, blindness, confusion,
     stun, poison and berserk.

Curing
     Restores 50 hitpoints and removes cuts, blindness, confusion,
     stun, poison and hallucination.

Healing
     Restores 300 hitpoints and removes cuts, blindness, confusion,
     stun, poison and berserk.

*Healing*
     Restores 1200 hitpoints and removes cuts, blindness, confusion,
     stun, poison and berserk.

Potions of Life
     Restores 5000 hitpoints (about 5 times more than you'll ever
     have), restores all drained stats and experience, and removes all
     bad effects except hunger. These are very rare; save them in your
     home for a dangerous fight.


--- Restoring Items ---

From time to time your primary statistics and/or experience may be
drained. Statistics can be restored by quaffing a Potion of Restore
{name of stat} or a Potion of {Name of stat} or by eating a Mushroom of
Restoring. Some towns may provide this service for a fee. Experience
may be restored by quaffing a Potion of Restore Life Levels or using a
Rod of Restoration. You may also regain it in the normal course of your
adventuring or by quaffing a Potion of Experience. Some spells regain
lost experience points.

--- Other ---

There are also other items in the dungeon which may help you to recover
from various things that monsters may do to you. For example, some
mushrooms may help you recover from confusion, a Potion of Heroism
will prevent you from becoming afraid, a Potion of Slow Poison will
reduce the effects of becoming poisoned, etc. Most objects' names give
a clear idea of the benefits and dangers of using them and so an
exhaustive list is not provided in this document.


--
Original   : (??), Leon Marrick and Chris Weisiger
Updated    : (??)
Updated    : Zangband DevTeam
Updated    : Hengband 1.0.11
Updated    : Hengband 3.0.0, English translation backwardsEric
